OperatingSystems
MiniShellAssignment
Duedate(viamoodle):December14th,23:59
Individualworkpolicy
Theworkyousubmitinthiscourseisrequiredtobetheresultofyourindividualeffort
only.Youmaydiscussconceptsandideaswithothers,butyoumustprogramindividually.
Youshouldneverobserveanotherstudent’scode, fromthisorprevioussemesters.
Studentsviolatingthispolicywill receiveacoursegradeof 250(“didnot completecourse
requirements”).
AIUsagePolicy
AI tools(ChatGPT,Claude,Copilot, etc.)maybeusedfor learningconceptsand
understandingsystemcalls,butthecoursematerial isyourprimaryresource.
Youmustunderstandandbeabletoexplaineverylineofcodeyousubmit.Submittingcodeyou
don’tunderstandviolatestheindividualworkpolicy.
Requireddocumentation: IfyouuseAItools,addacommentattheendofyourmyshell.cfile
withalinktoyourconversation(e.g.,//AIchat:https://...).
1 Introduction
Thegoalofthisassignment istogainexperiencewithprocessmanagement,pipes, signals,andthe
relevantsystemcalls.Todothis,youwill implementasimpleshellprogram.Youwill implement
thefunctionthatreceivesashellcommandandperformsit.Weprovideaskeletonshellprogram
(shell.c),whichreads linesfromtheuser,parsesthemintocommands,andinvokesyourfunction.
Youalsohavetoimplementanyinitialization/finalizationcodethatyourequire(moredetailsbelow).
1.1 RequiredReadingandResources
Beforeyoustartcoding,makesuretostudythefollowing:
1. Signals:Readtheself_learning_signals.pdfmanualavailableonMoodle.Understanding
signalhandlingisessential forthisassignment.
2. Systemcalls:Learnaboutandusethefollowingsystemcalls:fork(),execvp()(nottobe
confusedwithexecv()!), wait(), waitpid(), pipe(), dup2(), open(), close(), signal(),
sigaction(),getpid().
3. Signal-relatedconcepts:UnderstandSIGINT,SIGCHLD, signalhandlers,andthedifference
betweensignal()andsigaction().
1
4. Bash behavior: In general, your shell will behave like the standard bash shell. However, there is
an important exception: standard shells use a special OS mechanism that prevents SIGINT from
being sent to background processes when the user presses Ctrl-C (read about setpgid() and
this link if you’re curious). Your shell won’t use this mechanism, so the behavior of background
processes receiving a SIGINT won’t be the same as in bash.
5. Debugging: The strace program can be very useful for debugging. It provides a trace of all
system calls executed by a process, including (optionally) by child processes that the traced
process creates. Use it to understand what your shell is doing:
strace-f ./shell
1.2 The shell skeleton
The skeleton we provide executes an infinite loop. Each iteration does the following:
1. Reads a string containing a shell command from standard input. If Ctrl-D is pressed, the skeleton
exits.
2. Parses the command string into an array of words. A word is a non-empty sequence of non
whitespace characters, where whitespace means space, tab (\t), or newline (\n). The end of the
array is designated with a NULL entry.
3. Invokes your function, passing it the parsed command line array. The skeleton detects and ignores
empty lines (i.e., won’t invoke your function on an empty command).
1.3 Shell functionality
The shell will support the following operations, which are described in more detail in Section 2.2:
1. Executing commands. The user enters a command, i.e., a program and its arguments, such as
sleep 10. The shell executes the command and waits until it completes before accepting another
command.
2. Executing commands in the background. The user enters a command followed by &, for
example: sleep 10 &. The shell executes the command but does not wait for its completion
before accepting another command.
3. Multiple piping. The user enters between 2 and 10 commands separated by pipe symbols
(|), for example: ./prog1 | ./prog2 | ./prog3 | ... | ./prog10. This means there will
be between 1 and 9 pipe symbols in a valid command. Each command may include its own
arguments. The shell executes all commands concurrently, creating a pipeline where the standard
output of each command is piped to the standard input of the next command in the sequence.
The shell waits until all commands in the pipeline complete before accepting another command.
4. Input redirecting. The user enters one command and input file name separated by the
redirection symbol (<), for example: cat < file.txt. The shell executes the command so that
its standard input is redirected from the input file (instead of the default, which is to the user’s
terminal). The shell waits for the command to complete before accepting another command.
5. Output redirecting. The user enters one command and output file name separated by the
redirection symbol (>), for example: cat foo > file.txt. The shell executes the command so
that the command’s standard output is redirected to the output file (instead of the default, which
is to the user’s terminal). If the specified output file does not exist, it is created. If it exists, it is
truncated. The shell waits for the command to complete before accepting another command.
2
The shell doesn’t need to support built-in commands such as cd and exit. It only support
execution of program binaries as described above.
ASSUMPTIONS. You can assume the following:
1. If a command line contains the | symbol, then (1) it may appear multiple times and (2) each
occurrence is correctly placed, i.e., at least one word appears before and after each pipe symbol,
and each is separated by whitespace from them.
2. If a command line contains the & symbol, then it appears last on the command line and is
separated by whitespace. In other words, it is the last word of the command line.
3. If a command line contains the < symbol, then it appears one before last on the command line
and is separated by whitespace. In other words, the redirection operator and file name are the
last two words on the command line.
4. If a command line contains the > symbol, then it appears one before last on the command line
and is separated by whitespace. In other words, the redirection operator and file name are the
last two words on the command line.
5. A command line will contain at most one type of special operation: either piping (one or more
| symbols), background execution (&), input redirection (<), or output redirection (>). In other
words, these features cannot be combined in a single command.
6. Command lines will not contain quotation marks or apostrophes. (In normal shells, these are
used to support arguments that contain whitespace. Your shell doesn’t need to support this
feature.)
2 Assignment description
Implement the following functions in a file named myshell.c: prepare(), process_arglist(),
and finalize(). The following details the specifications of these functions.
2.1 int prepare(void)
The skeleton calls this function before the first invocation of process_arglist(). This function
returns 0 on success; any other return value indicates an error.
You can use this function for any initialization and setup that you think are necessary for your
process_arglist(). If you don’t need any initialization, just have this function return immediately;
but you must provide it for the skeleton to compile.
2.2 int process_arglist(int count, char **arglist)
Input This function receives an array arglist with count non-NULL words. This array contains
the parsed command line. The last entry in the array, arglist[count], is NULL. (So overall the
array size is count+1.)
3
Behavior
1. Commands specified in the arglist should be executed as a child process using fork() and
execvp() (not execv()). Notice that if the arglist array contains a shell symbol (&, | < or >),
the arglist should not be passed to execvp() as-is (more details below).
2. Executing commands in the background:
• If the last non-NULL word in arglist is "&" (a single ampersand), run the child process
in the background. The parent should not wait for the child process to finish, but instead
continue executing commands.
• Donot pass the & argument to execvp().
• Assume background processes don’t read input (stdin).
• Donot use fork twice. Only use a single call to fork.
3. Piping:
• If arglist contains one or more instances of the word "|" (pipe symbol), run multiple
child processes creating a pipeline, with the output (stdout) of each process piped to the
input (stdin) of the next process in the sequence.
• For each pipe in the command line, use the pipe() and dup2() system calls to connect the
processes.
• The shell should properly manage all file descriptors to avoid resource leaks and should wait
for all processes in the pipeline to complete before accepting another command.
• Use the same array for all execvp() calls by referencing items in arglist. There’s no need
to allocate a new array and duplicate parts of the original array. You may change arglist
itself if needed.
4. Input redirection:
• If arglist contains the word “<” (a single redirection symbol), open the specified file (that
appears after the redirection symbol) and then run the child process, with the input (stdin)
redirected from the input file.
• To redirect the child process’ input, use the dup2() system call.
• You should fork before opening the file.
• For the open() call, use a mode of 0600 (S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR).
5. Output redirection:
• If arglist contains the word “>” (a single redirection symbol), open the specified file (that
appears after the redirection symbol) and then run the child process, with the output
(stdout) redirected to the output file.
• For the open() call, use a mode of 0600 (S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR).
• To redirect the child process’ output, use the dup2() system call.
• You should fork before opening the file.
6. Handling of SIGINT:
4
• Background on SIGINT (this bullet contains things you should know, not things you
need to implement in the assignment): When the user presses Ctrl-C, a SIGINT signal is sent
(by the OS) to the shell and all its child processes. The SIGINT signal can also be sent to a
specific process using the kill() system call. (There’s also a kill program that invokes
this system call, e.g., kill-INT <pid>.)
• After prepare() finishes, the parent (shell) should not terminate upon SIGINT.
• Foreground child processes (regular commands or parts of a pipe) should terminate upon
SIGINT.
• Background child processes should not terminate upon SIGINT.
• NOTE: The program execvp()ed in a child process might change SIGINT handling. This
is something the shell has no control over. Therefore, the above two bullets apply only to (1)
the behavior before execvp() and (2) if the execvp()ed program doesn’t change SIGINT
handling. Most programs don’t change the SIGINT handling they inherent, so these bullets
apply to basically any program you are likely to test with (sleep, ls, cat, etc.).
• IMPORTANT: To use some signal-related system calls, C11 code must have a certain
macro defined. Be sure to use the compilation command line provided in Section 3 or your
code might not compile.
• You may only use the signal system call to set the signal disposition to SIG_IGN or
to SIG_DFL. For any other use, particularly setting a signal handler, you must use the
sigaction system call.
7. Assume that the results of the provided parser are correct.
8. You should prevent zombies and remove them as fast as possible.
Output
1. The process_arglist() function should not return until every foreground child process it
created exits.
2. In the original (shell/parent) process, process_arglist() should return 1 if no error occurs. (This
makes sure the shell continues processing user commands.) If process_arglist() encounters an
error, it should print an error message and return 0. (See below for what constitutes an error.)
Error handling
1. If an error occurs in the shell parent process, there’s no need to notify any running child processes.
2. If an error occurs in a signal handler in the shell parent process, there’s no need to notify
process_arglist(). Just print a proper error message and terminate the shell process with
exit(1).
3. If wait/waitpid in the shell parent process return an error for one of the following reasons, it is
not considered an actual error that requires exiting the shell:
• ECHILD
• EINTR. (You can also avoid an EINTR “error” in the first place. Hint: read about the
SA_RESTART option in sigaction.)
Read the wait documentation to understand what these reasons mean.
5
4. If an error occurs in a child process (before it calls execvp()), print a proper error message and
terminate only the child process using exit(1). Nothing should change for the parent or other
child processes.
5. User commands might be invalid (e.g., a non-existing program or redirecting to a file without
write permission, more pipe commands than what the shell is supposed to support, etc). Such
cases should be treated as an error in the child process (i.e., they must not terminate the shell).
6. Error messages should be printed to stderr. (This applies to both parent and child processes.)
7. Error message do not have to be worded exactly as in a real shell. Anything returned by
strerror()or perror() is ok.
8. There’s no requirement to exit “cleanly” on error. Processes may terminate without freeing
memory.
2.3 int finalize(void)
The skeleton calls this function before exiting. This function returns 0 on success; any other return
value indicates an error.
You can use this function for any cleanups related to process_arglist() that you think are
necessary. If you don’t need any cleanups, just have this function return immediately; but you
must provide it for the skeleton to compile. Note that cleaning up the arglist array is not your
responsibility. It is taken care of by the skeleton code.
3 Submission instructions
1. Submit just your myshell.c file. (Do not assume you can change the shell.c file!) Document
your code with explanations for every non-trivial part of your code. Help the grader understand
your solution and the flow of your code.
2. The program must compile cleanly on the kilonova server (with no errors or warnings,
you can find the manual for connecting to kilonova in moodle) when the following command is
run in a directory containing the source code files:
gcc-O3-D_POSIX_C_SOURCE=200809-Wall-std=c11 shell.c myshell.c
3.1 Example Usage
For example, compile the shell with:
gcc-O3-D_POSIX_C_SOURCE=200809-Wall-std=c11 shell.c myshell.c-o shell
Then, for the following commands:
./shell
echo Hello World > hello.txt
cat hello.txt
You should get the output:
Hello World
6


OperatingSystems(0368216208)
ConcurrentQueueAssignment
Duedate(viamoodle):January12th,23:59
Individualworkpolicy
Theworkyousubmitinthiscourseisrequiredtobetheresultofyourindividualeffort
only.Youmaydiscussconceptsandideaswithothers,butyoumustprogramindividually.
Youshouldneverobserveanotherstudent’scode, fromthisorprevioussemesters.
Studentsviolatingthispolicywill receiveacoursegradeof 250(“didnot completecourse
requirements”).
AIUsagePolicy
AI tools(ChatGPT,Claude,Copilot, etc.)maybeusedfor learningconceptsand
understandingsystemcalls,butthecoursematerial isyourprimaryresource.
Youmustunderstandandbeabletoexplaineverylineofcodeyousubmit.Submittingcodeyou
don’tunderstandviolatestheindividualworkpolicy.
Requireddocumentation:IfyouuseAItools,addacommentattheendofyourqueue.cfile
withalinktoyourconversation(e.g.,//AIchat:https://...).
1 Introduction
Thegoalofthisassignment istogainexperiencewiththreadsynchronization,conditionvariables,
andthechallengesofconcurrentprogramming.
Inthisassignment,youwill implementagenericconcurrentFIFOqueuethatsupportsenqueue
anddequeueoperations.Concurrentqueuesare fundamentaldatastructures inmulti-threaded
programs,usedinscenariossuchas:
•Threadpoolswhereworkerthreadsfetchtasksfromasharedqueue
•Producer-consumerpatternswheresomethreadsgenerateworkitemswhileothersprocessthem
•Messagepassingbetweenthreadsinevent-drivensystems
Yourqueuemusthandlemultiplethreadssafely,attemptingtoenqueueanddequeuesimulta
neously,whileensuringfairness: threadswaitingfor itemsshouldreceivethemintheorderthey
startedwaiting(FIFO).Your librarywillbecalledbymultiplethreadscreatedbyatestcode.You
donotneedtocreatethreadsyourself—onlyensureyourqueueoperationsarethread-safe.
1
2 Assignment description
Implement the following library in a file named queue.c. The following details the specification of
the library.
void initQueue(void);
This function will be called before the queue is used. This is your chance to initialize your data
structure.
void destroyQueue(void);
This function will be used for cleanup when the queue is no longer needed. It is possible for
initQueue to be called afterwards.
Adds an item to the queue.
void enqueue(void*);
void* dequeue(void);
Remove an item from the queue. Will block if empty.
size_t visited(void);
Return the number of items that have passed inside the queue: return the total count of items
that have been both enqueued and subsequently dequeued. This should not block due to concurrent
operations, i.e., you may not take a lock at all.
Thread interface: You must use C threads (threads.h), as described in the recitation. If you’ve
heard of or know pthreads—you may not use them in this assignment.
Error handling & termination:
• You can assume malloc does not fail.
• Noneed to check for errors in calls to mtx_* and cnd_* functions.
Correctness requirements:
• You may assume no calls will be made to the queue before initQueue or after destroyQueue
(unless initQueue is called again).
• You may assume that initQueue() will be called by a single thread before any concurrent queue
operations begin. There is no need to make initQueue() itself thread-safe.
• You may assume that destroyQueue() will run “solo.” In other words, assume that no other
queue operations will be active in the time period between destroyQueue() being called and
until it finishes. Specifically, you may assume:– No threads are currently executing enqueue() or dequeue()– No threads are blocked/sleeping in dequeue() waiting for items– The queue is empty when destroyQueue() is called
2
• The library should be thread-safe for enqueue(), dequeue(), and visited() operations. For
example, an item added to the queue once should not be returned from two dequeue calls.
• Make sure no resource deadlocks are possible in your program.
• Threads should run in parallel. Only accesses to shared data should be synchronized with locks.
• The queue must satisfy the following:
1. Dequeue should be distributed to sleeping threads in FIFO order. If the queue is empty and
there are k threads sleeping, then the next k items added to the queue should be handled by
these threads according to the order in which they went to sleep (i.e., the first item added
should be handled by the first thread that went to sleep, etc.). Specifically, if the queue is
empty and there are k threads sleeping, inserting into the queue must make sure that the
oldest sleeping thread will process the inserted item.
2. A thread may put itself to sleep (to wait for an item) only if there are no items available for
it when it arrives at the queue. (That is, if the queue is empty or if every item in the queue
has to be handled by a different thread, due to the FIFO requirement.) If a thread goes to
sleep after arriving at the queue, it should be woken up only once there is an item available
for it to process (according to the FIFO requirement). A sleeping thread must not wake
up only to go back to sleep again. (Assume that spurious wakeups are not possible.)
• Forthe visited() function that return size_t and is not allowed to lock, it is OK if the returned
number is not exact due to concurrent threads taking their place. If no concurrent actions take
place the number should be exact. C11 undefined behavior is not allowed.
3 Relevant functions & system calls
1. Learn about and (possibly) use the following: thrd_create(), thrd_join(), cnd_init(),
cnd_wait(), cnd_signal(), cnd_broadcast(), thrd_exit(), mtx_init()/lock()/trylock()/unlock().
4 Submission instructions
1. Submit just your queue.c file. Document your code with explanations for every non-trivial part
of your code. Help the grader understand your solution and the flow of your code.
2. The program must compile cleanly on the course virtual machine (no errors or warnings) when
the following command is run in a directory containing the queue.c file:
gcc-O3-D_POSIX_C_SOURCE=200809-Wall-std=c11-pthread-c queue.c
3